Optimistic Sync (#2770)
ethereum/consensus-specs: sync/optimistic.md

# Optimistic Sync

## Introduction

In order to provide a syncing execution engine with a partial view of the head
of the chain, it may be desirable for a consensus engine to import beacon
blocks without verifying the execution payloads. This partial sync is called an
*optimistic sync*.

## Constants

|Name|Value|Unit
|---|---|---|
|`SAFE_SLOTS_TO_IMPORT_OPTIMISTICALLY`| `128` | slots

*Note: the `SAFE_SLOTS_TO_IMPORT_OPTIMISTICALLY` must be user-configurable. See
[Fork Choice Poisoning](#fork-choice-poisoning).*

## Helpers

Let `head_block: BeaconBlock` be the result of calling of the fork choice
algorithm at the time of block production.

Let `justified_block: BeaconBlock` be the latest current justified ancestor

> ancestor of the `head_block`.

Author: Thanks, removed in 736f3cec.

Let `optimistic_roots: Set[Root]` be the set of `hash_tree_root(block)` for all

> optimistically imported blocks which have yet to receive an `INVALID` or

Author: Good idea, I changed this in 2ce2aac0. Let me know what you think about that wording.

`VALID` designation from an execution engine.

```python
def is_optimistic(block: BeaconBlock) -> bool:
    hash_tree_root(block) in optimistic_roots
```

```python
def latest_valid_ancestor(block: BeaconBlock) -> BeaconBlock:
    while True:

>         if not is_optimistic(block) or block.parent_root == Root():

Reviewer: Something that confused me here is that a block that returned `INVALID`  from the EL would pass this test and return here `block`. Perhaps it's worth adding a note that `block` is assumed valid here?

Author: Makes sense! I added a comment in de1a6caa.

	        return block
        block = get_block(block.parent_root)
```

```python
def is_execution_block(block: BeaconBlock) -> BeaconBlock:
	block.body.execution_payload != ExecutionPayload()
```

```python
def should_optimistically_import_block(current_slot: Slot, block: BeaconBlock) -> bool:
	block.slot + SAFE_SLOTS_TO_IMPORT_OPTIMISTICALLY <= current_slot
```

Let only a node which returns `is_optimistic(head) == True` be an *optimistic

> node*. Let only a validator on an optimistic node be an *optimistic validator*.

Reviewer 2: Should all lines be contiguous without new lines to match the format of the rest of the spec?

Author: I'm not sure that the rest of the spec documents are consistent regarding new lines. For example, https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/dev/specs/merge/p2p-interface.md seems to start a new lines mid-sentence and mid-paragraph.

I'd be happy to change if the spec maintainers have some preference,

When this specification only defines behaviour for an optimistic
node/validator, but *not* for the non-optimistic case, assume default
behaviours without regard for optimistic sync.

## Mechanisms

> ## When to optimistically import blocks

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### When to optimistically import blocks
```

> A block MUST NOT be optimistically imported, unless either of the following

Reviewer 4: This can probably be reworded to more straightforward language:
```suggestion
A block can be optimistically imported ONLY when either of the following conditions are met
```

Author: Ah yeah, I was trying to work within the [RFC keywords](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119). I'll check it out and see if I can make it simpler :pray:

conditions are met:

1. The justified checkpoint has execution enabled. I.e.,
   `is_execution_block(get_block(get_state(head_block).current_justified_checkpoint.root))`
1. The current slot (as per the system clock) is at least `SAFE_SLOTS_TO_IMPORT_OPTIMISTICALLY` ahead of

>    the slot of the block being imported. I.e., `should_optimistically_import_block(current_slot) == True`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
   the slot of the block being imported. I.e., `should_optimistically_import_block(current_slot, block) == True`.
```

>    the slot of the block being imported. I.e., `should_optimistically_import_block(current_slot, block) == True`.

Author: I've done this in 6c13e2ec. I added a `Store` so we can access the blocks at states without undefined `get_block` and `get_state` functions. Adding blocks/states to the `Store` is undefined, but I guess that's OK.

*See [Fork Choice Poisoning](#fork-choice-poisoning) for the motivations behind
these conditions.*

> ## How to optimistically import blocks

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### How to optimistically import blocks
```

To optimistically import a block:

> - The `execute_payload` function MUST return `True` if the execution

Reviewer 5: Should we add a relative link to the function here?

```suggestion
- The [`execute_payload`](../specs/merge/beacon-chain.md#execute_payload) function MUST return `True` if the execution
```

	engine returns `SYNCING` or `VALID`. An `INVALID` response MUST return `False`.

> - The `validate_merge_block` function MUST NOT raise an assertion if both the

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- The [`validate_merge_block`](../specs/merge/fork-choice.md#validate_merge_block) function MUST NOT raise an assertion if both the
```

> - The `validate_merge_block` function MUST NOT raise an assertion if both the

Author: Oh yep, I forgot this! Added here: 60eab257.

`VALID`.

Optimistically imported blocks MUST pass all verifications included in
`process_block` (withstanding the modifications to `execute_payload`).

A consensus engine MUST be able to retrospectively (i.e., after import) modify
the status of `SYNCING` blocks to be either `VALID` or `INVALID` based upon responses
from an execution engine. I.e., perform the following transitions:

- `SYNCING` -> `VALID`
- `SYNCING` -> `INVALID`

When a block transitions from `SYNCING` -> `VALID`, all *ancestors* of the
block MUST also transition from `SYNCING` -> `VALID`. Such a block is no longer
considered "optimistically imported".

When a block transitions from `SYNCING` -> `INVALID`, all *descendants* of the
block MUST also transition from `SYNCING` -> `INVALID`.

When a block transitions from the `SYNCING` state it is removed from the set of
`optimistic_roots`.

### Execution Engine Errors

When an execution engine returns an error or fails to respond to a payload
validity request for some block, a consensus engine:

- MUST NOT optimistically import the block.
- MUST NOT apply the block to the fork choice store.
- MAY queue the block for later processing.

> ### Assumptions about Execution Engine Behaviour

Reviewer 5: The other Bellatrix specs don't specify EE assumptions. It makes me wonder if it is better to update the official execution API to reflect this

Author: This is a good point, we considered this too. @mkalinin and I spoke about this and ended up deciding to leave this note here and Mikhail would update the EE specs.

Do you have any objections to leaving this here if we also update the EE specs, @terencechain?

Reviewer 3: Here is the respective change to the Engine API https://github.com/ethereum/execution-apis/pull/152

Reviewer 5: > Do you have any objections to leaving this here if we also update the EE specs, @terencechain?

No objection :)

This specification assumes execution engines will only return `SYNCING` when
there is insufficient information available to make a `VALID` or `INVALID`
determination on the given `ExecutionPayload` (e.g., the parent payload is
unknown). Specifically, `SYNCING` responses should be fork-specific, in that
the search for a block on one chain MUST NOT trigger a `SYNCING` response for
another chain.

### Re-Orgs

The consensus engine MUST support any chain reorganisation which does *not*
affect the justified checkpoint. The consensus engine MAY support re-orgs
beyond the justified checkpoint.

If the justified checkpoint transitions from `SYNCING` -> `INVALID`, a
consensus engine MAY choose to alert the user and force the application to
exit.

## Fork Choice

Consensus engines MUST support removing blocks from fork choice that transition
from `SYNCING` to `INVALID`. Specifically, a block deemed `INVALID` at any
point MUST NOT be included in the canonical chain and the weights from those

> `INVALID` blocks MUST NOT be applied to any `VALID` or `SYNCING` ancestors.

Reviewer 3: It implies `store.latest_messages` is reverted to a state in which an `INVALID` block doesn't exist, right? I think it worth noting explicitly.

Author: > It implies store.latest_messages is reverted to a state in which an INVALID block doesn't exist, right?

It doesn't necessarily "revert" to an old state, since other aspects of the block tree may differ.

I agree that it should be *as if* the INVALID block doesn't exist, but I'm not sure how to specify that when in proto-array it will "exist" but be filtered out. Perhaps you could provide another suggestion, please?

### Fork Choice Poisoning

During the merge transition it is possible for an attacker to craft a
`BeaconBlock` with an execution payload that references an
eternally-unavailable `body.execution_payload.parent_hash` (i.e., the parent
hash is random bytes). In rare circumstances, it is possible that an attacker
can build atop such a block to trigger justification. If an optimistic node
imports this malicious chain, that node will have a "poisoned" fork choice
store, such that the node is unable to produce a block that descends from the
head (due to the invalid chain of payloads) and the node is unable to produce a
block that forks around the head (due to the justification of the malicious
chain).

> If honest chain exists which justifies a higher epoch than the malicious chain,

Reviewer 3: It should be enough for a node to import an honest chain justifying an epoch *prior to* malicious chain that justifies the *same* epoch to avoid poisoning the fork choice store and eventually finishing an optimistic sync which in this case should converge on the honest chain

Author: >  an honest chain justifying an epoch prior to malicious chain that justifies the same epoch 

I'm not sure I follow this sorry.

Reviewer 3: > If an honest chain exists which justifies a higher epoch than the malicious chain, that chain will take precedence and revive any poisoned store.

Do we need a *higher* epoch to be justified by an honest chain? From my perspective the *same* epoch justified by an honest chain is enough to prevent poisoned store, with the condition that an honest justification is applied to the store *before* the malicious one. Simply:

1) A node imports malicious chain that justifies epoch `N`
2) The store is poisoned and rejects blocks of an honest chain that has not yet justified `N`

VS

1) A node imports an honest chain that justifies epoch `N`
2) A node imports a malicious chain that justifies epoch `N`
3) Despite of (2) the store is healthy and is capable of keep applying blocks of an honest chain

An honest chain justifying `N+1` does also prevent store poisoning. My point is that justifying `N` is also enough. And this is what we assume to get in 4 epochs: an honest chain with adversary power `< 1/3` justifies epoch `N`. Then we allow for optimistically import *any* other chain without the risk of a store being poisoned.

Am I missing anything?

Author: >  with the condition that an honest justification is applied to the store before the malicious one

Ah yes, I see what you mean now. So a higher epoch *always* fixes it and a lower one fixes it *sometimes*, given a message ordering assumption.

I've mentioned this "poisoning prevention" in 6d73b0a4 :)

it is acceptable to optimistically import transition blocks during the sync
process. Since there is an assumption that an honest chain with a higher
justified checkpoint exists, any fork choice poisoning will be short-lived and
resolved before that node is required to produce a block.

However, the assumption that the honest, canonical chain will always justify
within `SAFE_SLOTS_TO_IMPORT_OPTIMISTICALLY` slots is dubious. Therefore,
clients MUST provide the following command line flag to assist with manual
disaster recovery:

- `--safe-slots-to-import-optimistically`: modifies the
	`SAFE_SLOTS_TO_IMPORT_OPTIMISTICALLY`.

## Checkpoint Sync (Weak Subjectivity Sync)

A consensus engine MAY assume that the `ExecutionPayload` of a block used as an
anchor for checkpoint sync is `VALID` without necessarily providing that
payload to an execution engine.

## Validator assignments

An optimistic node is *not* a full node. It is unable to produce blocks, since
an execution engine cannot produce a payload upon an unknown parent. It cannot
faithfully attest to the head block of the chain, since it has not fully
verified that block.

### Block Production

> A optimistic validator MUST NOT produce a block (i.e., sign across the

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
An optimistic validator MUST NOT produce a block (i.e., sign across the
```

`DOMAIN_BEACON_PROPOSER` domain).

### Attesting

An optimistic validator MUST NOT participate in attestation (i.e., sign across the
`DOMAIN_BEACON_ATTESTER`, `DOMAIN_SELECTION_PROOF` or
`DOMAIN_AGGREGATE_AND_PROOF` domains).

### Participating in Sync Committees

An optimistic validator MUST NOT participate in sync committees (i.e., sign across the
`DOMAIN_SYNC_COMMITTEE`, `DOMAIN_SYNC_COMMITTEE_SELECTION_PROOF` or
`DOMAIN_CONTRIBUTION_AND_PROOF` domains).

## P2P Networking

### The Gossip Domain (gossipsub)

#### `beacon_block`

An optimistic validator MAY subscribe to the `beacon_block` topic. Propagation
validation conditions are modified as such:

Do not apply the existing condition:

- [REJECT] The block's parent (defined by block.parent_root) passes validation.

Instead, apply the new condition:

> - [REJECT] The block's parent (defined by block.parent_root) passes all

Reviewer 3: Consider reflecting this change in the `p2p-interface`

Author: Good idea, I did this in 1228e018.

    validation, excluding verification of the block.body.execution_payload.
- [IGNORE] The block's parent (defined by block.parent_root) passes all
    validation, including verification of the block.body.execution_payload.

The effect of these modifications is that invalid payloads may be propagated
across the network, but only when contained inside a block that is valid in *all
other aspects*.

#### Other Topics

An optimistic node MUST NOT subscribe to the following topics:

-  `beacon_aggregate_and_proof`
-  `voluntary_exit`
-  `proposer_slashing`
-  `attester_slashing`
-  `beacon_attestation_{subnet_id}`
-  `sync_committee_contribution_and_proof`
-  `sync_committee_{subnet_id}`

Once the node ceases to be optimistic, it MAY re-subscribe to the
aforementioned topics.

### The Req/Resp Domain

> Non-faulty, optimistic nodes may send blocks which result in an INVALID

Reviewer 3: Do we want this to be reflected in the `p2p-interface` as well?

Author: Also done in 1228e018.

response from an execution engine. To prevent network segregation between
optimistic and non-optimistic nodes, transmission of an INVALID payload SHOULD
NOT cause a node to be down-scored or disconnected.

## Ethereum Beacon APIs

Consensus engines which provide an implementation of the [Ethereum Beacon
APIs](https://github.com/ethereum/beacon-APIs) must take care to avoid
presenting optimistic blocks as fully-verified blocks.

### Helpers

Let the following response types be defined as any response with the
corresponding HTTP status code:

- "Success" Response: Status Codes 200-299.
- "Not Found" Response: Status Code 404.
- "Syncing" Response: Status Code 503.

### Requests for Optimistic Blocks

When information about an optimistic block is requested, the consensus engine:

- MUST NOT respond with success.
- MAY respond with not found.
- MAY respond with syncing.

### Requests for an Optimistic Head

> When `is_optimistic(head) == True`, the consensus engine:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
When `is_optimistic(head) is True`, the consensus engine:
```

- MUST NOT return an optimistic `head`.
- MAY substitute the head block with `latest_valid_ancestor(block)`.
- MAY return syncing.

### Requests to Validators Endpoints

> When `is_optimistic(head) == True`, the consensus engine MUST return syncing to

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
When `is_optimistic(head) is True`, the consensus engine MUST return syncing to
```

# Optimistic Sync

[`validate_merge_block`]: ../specs/bellatrix/fork-choice.md#validate_merge_block

## Introduction

In order to provide a syncing execution engine with a partial view of the head
of the chain, it may be desirable for a consensus engine to import beacon
blocks without verifying the execution payloads. This partial sync is called an
*optimistic sync*.

> 

Author: Good idea, addressed in 52caba6e

## Constants

|Name|Value|Unit
|---|---|---|
|`SAFE_SLOTS_TO_IMPORT_OPTIMISTICALLY`| `128` | slots

*Note: the `SAFE_SLOTS_TO_IMPORT_OPTIMISTICALLY` must be user-configurable. See
[Fork Choice Poisoning](#fork-choice-poisoning).*

## Helpers

Let `head: BeaconBlock` be the result of calling of the fork choice
algorithm at the time of block production. Let `head_block_root: Root` be the
root of that block.

Let `blocks: Dict[Root, BeaconBlock]` and `block_states: Dict[Root,
BeaconState]` be the blocks (and accompanying states) that have been verified
either completely or optimistically.

Let `optimistic_roots: Set[Root]` be the set of `hash_tree_root(block)` for all
optimistically imported blocks which have only received a `SYNCING` designation
from an execution engine (i.e., they are not known to be `INVALID` or `VALID`).

```python
@dataclass

> class Store(object):

Author: Great idea! Addressed in b50bee16

    optimistic_roots: Set[Root]
    head_block_root: Root
    blocks: Dict[Root, BeaconBlock]
    block_states: Dict[Root, BeaconState]
```

```python
def is_optimistic(store: Store, block: BeaconBlock) -> bool:
    return hash_tree_root(block) in store.optimistic_roots
```

```python
def latest_verified_ancestor(store: Store, block: BeaconBlock) -> BeaconBlock:
    # It is assumed that the `block` parameter is never an INVALID block.
    while True:
        if not is_optimistic(store, block) or block.parent_root == Root():
            return block
        block = store.blocks[block.parent_root]
```

```python
def is_execution_block(block: BeaconBlock) -> BeaconBlock:
    return block.body.execution_payload != ExecutionPayload()
```

```python
def should_optimistically_import_block(store: Store, current_slot: Slot, block: BeaconBlock) -> bool:

>     justified_root = store.block_states[store.head_block_root].current_justified_checkpoint.root

Reviewer 7: Consider a header comment for this function that this `should` turns into a "MAY optimistically" import (rather than a "MUST optimistically import".

In fact maybe we should change the name from `should_` to `may_` or try something like `is_optimistically_importable`

Author: Good idea. Changed to `is_optimistic_candidate_block` in 24947be7.

>     justifed_is_verified = is_execution_block(store.blocks[justified_root])

Reviewer 8: nit: Is `justified_is_verified` the right name here?  We're effectively checking that the merge block is justified so may be `merge_is_justified`? or `justified_is_execution_block`.

To me the `verified` in the name is making me think it's about whether it's optimistic or fully verified.

Author: Ooh, good catch! Fixed in be4319a0

    block_is_deep = block.slot + SAFE_SLOTS_TO_IMPORT_OPTIMISTICALLY <= current_slot
    return justified_is_verified or block_is_deep
```

Let only a node which returns `is_optimistic(store, head) is True` be an *optimistic
node*. Let only a validator on an optimistic node be an *optimistic validator*.

When this specification only defines behaviour for an optimistic
node/validator, but *not* for the non-optimistic case, assume default
behaviours without regard for optimistic sync.

## Mechanisms

### When to optimistically import blocks

A block MAY be optimistically imported when
`should_optimistically_import_block(store, current_slot, block)` returns
`True`. This ensures that blocks are only optimistically imported if either:

1. The justified checkpoint has execution enabled.

> 1. The current slot (as per the system clock) is at least

Reviewer 7: Suggest defining `current_slot` wrt wall clock time in the helper exposition. Otherwise, it isn't clear when just reading `should_optimistically_import_block` what it means in that context

Author: Nice one, addressed in bfe41725

   `SAFE_SLOTS_TO_IMPORT_OPTIMISTICALLY` ahead of the slot of the block being
   imported.

*See [Fork Choice Poisoning](#fork-choice-poisoning) for the motivations behind
these conditions.*

### How to optimistically import blocks

To optimistically import a block:

- The [`execute_payload`](../specs/bellatrix/beacon-chain.md#execute_payload) function MUST return `True` if the execution
	engine returns `SYNCING` or `VALID`. An `INVALID` response MUST return `False`.

> - The [`validate_merge_block`][] function MUST NOT raise an assertion if both the

Reviewer 7: This means if these values  are unknown, bypass that and the rest of the validation. "MUST NOT raise an assertion" was not immediately clear to me.

maybe add "i.e. `if pow_block is one and pow_parent is None`, skip all assertions in `validate_merge_block`." or something to that tune

Reviewer 7: Have we considered how to do this when `TERMINAL_BLOCK_HASH` is set?

Author: > Have we considered how to do this when TERMINAL_BLOCK_HASH is set?

Very good question. I considered this and added some helpful (but non-substantiative) changes in 50b236e5.

> maybe add "i.e. if pow_block is one and pow_parent is None, skip all assertions in validate_merge_block." or something to that tune

After considering `TERMINAL_BLOCK_HASH`, I think we do need *some* assertions in `validate_merge_block`. My changes in 50b236e5 might help to clarify what was not clear to you?

One option for making this clearer is to break `validate_merge_block` into two functions; one that checks `TERMINAL_BLOCK_HASH` things and another that calls out to the EL. Then, it would be simple for us to state that the EL function should always return some static value. I'm happy to try this if it's appealing to you.

Reviewer 7: this should be fine

`pow_block` and `pow_parent` are unknown to the execution engine.
- The parent of the block MUST NOT have an INVALID execution payload.

> In addition to this change to validation, the consensus engine MUST be able to

Author: Nice one, addressed in 4ccd38b5

ascertain, after import, which blocks returned `SYNCING` and which returned
`VALID`.

Optimistically imported blocks MUST pass all verifications included in
`process_block` (withstanding the modifications to `execute_payload`).

A consensus engine MUST be able to retrospectively (i.e., after import) modify
the status of `SYNCING` blocks to be either `VALID` or `INVALID` based upon responses
from an execution engine. I.e., perform the following transitions:

- `SYNCING` -> `VALID`
- `SYNCING` -> `INVALID`

When a block transitions from `SYNCING` -> `VALID`, all *ancestors* of the

> block MUST also transition from `SYNCING` -> `VALID`. Such a block is no longer

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
block MUST also transition from `SYNCING` -> `VALID`. Such a block and any previously `SYNCING` ancestors are no longer
```

considered "optimistically imported".

When a block transitions from `SYNCING` -> `INVALID`, all *descendants* of the
block MUST also transition from `SYNCING` -> `INVALID`.

> When a block transitions from the `SYNCING` state it is removed from the set of

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
When a block transitions from the `SYNCING` state, it is removed from the set of
```

`store.optimistic_roots`.

> When a "merge block" (i.e. a block which enables execution) is declared to be

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
When a "merge block" (i.e. the first block which enables execution in a chain) is declared to be
```

`VALID` by an execution engine (either directly or indirectly), the full
[`validate_merge_block`][] MUST be run against the merge block. If the block
fails [`validate_merge_block`][], the merge block MUST be treated the same as
an `INVALID` block (i.e., it and all its descendants are invalidated and
removed from the block tree).

### Execution Engine Errors

When an execution engine returns an error or fails to respond to a payload
validity request for some block, a consensus engine:

- MUST NOT optimistically import the block.
- MUST NOT apply the block to the fork choice store.
- MAY queue the block for later processing.

### Assumptions about Execution Engine Behaviour

This specification assumes execution engines will only return `SYNCING` when
there is insufficient information available to make a `VALID` or `INVALID`
determination on the given `ExecutionPayload` (e.g., the parent payload is
unknown). Specifically, `SYNCING` responses should be fork-specific, in that
the search for a block on one chain MUST NOT trigger a `SYNCING` response for
another chain.

### Re-Orgs

The consensus engine MUST support any chain reorganisation which does *not*

> affect the justified checkpoint. The consensus engine MAY support re-orgs

Reviewer 7: Can this section clarify these are re-orgs of optimistic chain segments?

A fully verified justification will never revert if the consensus engine is following the spec *and* there is no 2/3 slashing event. (but a 2/3 slashing even could lead to a finality that is discordant with your current justification and pull you to another chain)

Author: Oh yeah, good point. In f4a125c8 I just removed this second sentence since I don't think it was really giving us anything. LMK what you think.

Reviewer 7: works for me

beyond the justified checkpoint.

If the justified checkpoint transitions from `SYNCING` -> `INVALID`, a
consensus engine MAY choose to alert the user and force the application to
exit.

## Fork Choice

Consensus engines MUST support removing blocks from fork choice that transition
from `SYNCING` to `INVALID`. Specifically, a block deemed `INVALID` at any
point MUST NOT be included in the canonical chain and the weights from those
`INVALID` blocks MUST NOT be applied to any `VALID` or `SYNCING` ancestors.

### Fork Choice Poisoning

During the merge transition it is possible for an attacker to craft a
`BeaconBlock` with an execution payload that references an
eternally-unavailable `body.execution_payload.parent_hash` (i.e., the parent

> hash is random bytes). In rare circumstances, it is possible that an attacker

Reviewer 7: Is "rare" the proper word here? Is it rare from a probability standpoint or actually difficult or costly to induce from a technical or crypto-economic standpoint?

Reviewer 7: Ah, this is "rare" as in it's a blck that *triggers* a justification and thus causes issues with `filter_block_tree`

Am I correct in assessing that a "fix" to the issue found a couple of weeks ago would sidestep this deadlock problem @paulhauner ?

Author: > Is "rare" the proper word here? Is it rare from a probability standpoint or actually difficult or costly to induce from a technical or crypto-economic standpoint?

I was using rare since the conditions required for this bug rarely occur on mainnet. I was being somewhat vague to avoid needing to disclose too much about the attack. I'm open to re-wording, though!

> Am I correct in assessing that a "fix" to the issue found a couple of weeks ago would sidestep this deadlock problem @paulhauner ?

I've also been thinking about this. I'd need to see the concrete proposal, but I don't think it's the silver bullet here. Even if fork choice can consider the *potential* just/fin of a block (i.e., the "fix"), I think we're still open to the scenario where one chain contains more attestations and can therefore justify in the next epoch whilst the other chain can't.

Reviewer 3: Assuming adversary power is 1/3 and 32 honest proposals is enough to justify a checkpoint, the probability of *not* justifying a checkpoint within 4 epochs is `1.11**-16` according to binomial distribution.

In our case it means that should an adversary be so lucky to get a chance to poison the fork choice the chance of successful attack with 4 epochs timeout is around 0.

1/3 power here makes a lot of sense as this is a liveness attack and Casper FFG has 1/3 honest assumption to maintain liveness. I am not feeling that strong about 32 honest proposals, but it seems that this is more than enough in a good networking conditions as the mainnet always justifies in an epoch.

So, I would say that we have a pretty strong reasoning behind this fix and its parameter.

Also, worth noting that an optimistic node justifying epoch `N` by applying an honest chain *prior to* applying malicious chain which justifies the same epoch `N` is enough to prevent poisoning. Justifying a higher epoch by an honest chain is not necessarily needed.

Reviewer 7: Got it.

concrete proposal coming soon -- cc @adiasg

- MUST NOT return an optimistic `head`.
- MAY substitute the head block with `latest_verified_ancestor(block)`.
- MAY return syncing.

### Requests to Validators Endpoints

When `is_optimistic(store, head) is True`, the consensus engine MUST return syncing to
all endpoints which match the following pattern:

- `eth/*/validator/*`

## Design Decision Rationale

### Why `SAFE_SLOTS_TO_IMPORT_OPTIMISTICALLY`?

Nodes can only import an optimistic block if their justified checkpoint is
verified or the block is older than `SAFE_SLOTS_TO_IMPORT_OPTIMISTICALLY`.

These restraints are applied in order to mitigate an attack where a block which
enables execution (a *transition block*) can reference a junk parent hash. This
makes it impossible for honest nodes to build atop that block. If an attacker
exploits a nuance in fork choice `filter_block_tree`, they can, in some rare
cases, produce a junk block that out-competes all locally produced blocks for
the head. This prevents a node from producing a chain of blocks, therefore
breaking liveness.

Thankfully, if 2/3rds of validators are not poisoned, they can justify an
honest chain which will un-poison all other nodes.

> Notably, this attack only exists for optimistic nodes. Nodes which fully verify

Reviewer 7: Probably worth making it even clearer that this means that if the vast majority of the network is "synced" going into the transition (which is generally the case for the network, and validator-nodes in particular), then the network cannot be poisoned

Author: Addressed in 0ec61bd1
